
--- Page 1 ---
> PREFACE.
Bs

Warr WxitTuAn has somewhere a fine and just atstinc-
tion between “loving by allowance” and “loving with
personal love.” This atstinction applies to books as well
as to men and women, and tn the case of the not very
numerous authors who are the objects of the personal
affection, tt brings a curtous consequence with tt. There
zs much more difference as to thetr best work than tn the
case of those others who are loved “ by allowance,’ by conven-
tion, and because it ts felt to be the right and proper thing
to love them. And in the sect—fairly large and jet
unusually chotce—of Austenians or fJanites, there would
probably be found partisans of the claim to primacy of
almost every one of the novels. To some the delightful
Freshness and humour of Northanger Abbey, zs com-
pleteness, finish, and entrain, obscure the undoubted critical
facts that its scale is small, and its scheme, after all, that
of burlesque or parody, a kind in which the first rank ts
reached with difficulty. Persuasion, relatively faint tm
tone, and not enthralling in interest, has devotees who
exalt above all the others its exquistte delicacy and keeping.
The catastrophe of Mansfield Park ¢s admittedly theatrical,
the hero and heroine are insipid, and the author has almost

--- Page 2 ---
Xx STUSTSHEN Gly

wuckedly destroyed all romantic interest by expressly adimit-
ting that Edmund only took Fanny because Mary shocked
him, and that Fanny might very likely have taken Cravford
of he had been a little more assiduous ; yet the matchless
rehearsal-scenes and the characters of Mrs. Norris and
athers have secured, I believe, a considerable party for tt.
Sense and Sensibility Las perhaps the fewest out-and-out
admirers , but tt does not want them.

L suppose, however, that the mazority of at least competent
votes would, all things considered, be divided between Emma
and the present book ; and perhaps the vulgar verdict (if
maeced a fondness for Miss Austen be not of ttself a patent
of exemption from any possible charge of vulgarity) would
go for Emma. Tt ts the larger, the more varied, the more
popular ; the author had by the time of tts composition seen
rather more of the world, and had tmproved her general,
though not her most peculiar and characteristic dialogue ;
such figures as Miss Bates, as the Eltons, cannot but
unite the suffrages of eversbody. On the other hand, J,
Sor ny part, declare for Pride and Prejudice unhesitatingly.
Lt seents to me the most perfect, the most characteristic, the
most eminently quintessential of its author's works ; and
for this contention tn such narrow space as ts peritittted to
me, L propose here to show cause.

Ln the first place, the book (¢t may be barely necessary to
remind the reader) was in its first shape written very early,
somewhere about 1796, when Miss Austenwasbarely twenty-
one; though tt was revised and finished at Chawton some
Jiftcen years later, and was not published till 1813, only
Sour years before her death. I do not know whether, tn

--- Page 3 ---
PREFACE. x1

this combination of the fresh and vigorous projection of
youth, and the critical revision of middle life, there may
be traced the distinct superiority tn point of construction,
which, as tt seems to me, it possesses over all the others.
The plot, though not elaborate, ts almost regular enough for
fielding ; hardly a character, hardly an incident could be
retreuched without loss to the story. The elopement of Lydia
and Wickham ts not, like that of Crawford and Mrs.
Rushworth, a coup de théatre ; 7 connects itself in. the
strictest way wth the course of the story earlier, and
brings about the denoucment with complete propriety. All
the minor passages—the loves of Jane and Bingley, the
advent of Mr. Collins, the visit to Hunsford, the Derby-
shire tour—fit tn after the sante unostentatious, but masterly
Jashion. There is no attempt at the hide-and-seek, in-ana-
out bustuess, which in the transactions between Frank
Churchill and Jane Fairfax contributes no doubt a good
deal to the intrigue of imma, but contributes tt in a fashion
which [ do not think the best feature of that otherwise
admirable book. Although Miss Austen always liked
something of the misunderstanding kind, which afforded
her opportunities for the dtsplay of the peculiar and tncon-
parable talent to be noticed presently, she has been satisfied
here with the perfectly natural occasions provided by the
Salse account of Darcy's conduct given by Wickham, and
by the awkwardness (arising with equal naturalness) from
the gradual transformation of Elizabeth's own feelings
Srom positive averston to actual love. I do not know
whether the all-grasping hand of the playwright has ever
been laid upon Pride and Prejudice ; and [ dare say that,

--- Page 4 ---
Nil PREFACE.

tf it were, the situations would prove not startling or
warish enough for the footlights, the character-scheme too
subtle and delicate for pit and gallery. But if the attempt
were made, it would certainly not be hampered by any of
those loosenesses of construction, which, sometines disguised
by the conventences of which the novelist can avatl himself,
appear at once on the stage.

LT think, however, though the thought will doubtless scent
heretical to more than one school of critics, that construction
ts not the highest merit, the choteest gift, of the novelist. It
sets off his other gifts and graces most advantageously to the
erttical eye; and the want of tt will sometimes mar those
graces—appieciably, though not quite consctoush'—to cyes
oy no means ultra-critical. But a very badly-built novel
which excelled tn pathetic or humorous character, or which
displayed consummate command of dialogue—perhaps the
rarest of all faculties—would be an tnfinitely better thing
than a faultless plot acted and told by puppets with pebbles
mn their mouths. And despite the ability which Miss Austen
has shown in working out the story, I for one should put
Pride and Prejudice far lower ¢f zt did not contatn what
seem to nie the very masterpieces of Miss Austen's humour
and of her faculty of character-creation—mneasterpleces who
may tndecd admit John Thorpe, the Eltons, Mrs. Norris,
and one or tivo others to thetr company, but who, tn one
instance certainly, and perhaps tn others, are still superior
to them.

The charactertstics of Miss Austen's huimour are so
subtle and delicate that they are, perhaps, at all times
easter to apprehend than to express, and at any particular

--- Page 5 ---
PREFACE. xii

time likely to be differently apprehended by different persons.
To me this humour seems to possess a greater affinity, on the
whole, to that of Addison than to any other of the numerous
species of this great British genus. The differences of
scheme, of time, of subject, of literary convention, are, of
course, obvious enough, the difference of sex does not,
perhaps, count for much, for there was a distinctly feminine
element tn “Mr. Spectator,’ and tn Jane Austen's genius
there was, though nothing mannish, much that was mascu-
line. But the likeness of quality consists tn a great num-
ber of common subdivisions of quality—ademureness, extreme
minuteness of touch, avoidance of loud tones and glaring
effects. Also there ts in both a certain not inhuman or
unamtable cruelty. It ts the custom with those who judge
grossly to contrast the good nature of Addison with the
savagery of Swift, the mildness of Miss Austen with the
boisterousness of Fielding and Simollett, even with the
ferocious practical jokes that her tmmediate predecessor, Miss
Burney, allowed without very much protest. Vet, both in
Mr. Addison and in Miss Austen there ts, though a re-
strained and well-mannered, an insatiable and ruthless
delight in roasting and cutting up a fool. A man tn the early
eighteenth century, of course, could push this taste further
than a lady in the early nineteenth ; and no doubt Moss
Austen’s principles, as well as her heart, would have shrunk
Srom such things as the letter from the unfortunate husband
zu the Spectator, who describes, with all the gusto and all
the innocence in the world, how his wife and his friend
induce him to play at blind-man’s-buff. But another
Spectator /etter—that of the damsel of fourtecn who
